+++
title = "Awk Mail Merge"
author = ["funcsec"]
date = 2023-01-13
publishDate = 2023-01-13
lastmod = 2023-01-16T13:16:10-08:00
tags = ["awk", "msmtp", "bash"]
categories = ["tutorial"]
draft = false
toc = "+"
omit_header_text = "+"
background_color_class = "bg-black-60"
description = "Use Awk and Msmtp as a mass mailer for being your own mail chimp"
featured_image = "images/charles-cooper-henderson_mail-coach-on-the-road.jpg"
images = ["images/charles-cooper-henderson_mail-coach-on-the-road.jpg"]
+++

I had a project where I needed to reach out to a number companies to
solicit bids for a catering contract. I found that sometimes the
companies would expose their email addresses on their websites or have
contact us forms. Email addresses directly on website, especially when
they are readable by bots are a good way to get a large amount of
spam, but it was quite helpful for this project.

I wanted to write a small program that would email the companies or
generate text to copy paste into their contact us forms on their
respective websites.

There are a number of great resources that already cover mail merges
with `awk`[^fn:1]<sup>, </sup>[^fn:2]. I wanted to play around with `awk` to add another
general office tool into my script library.

If you don't already know, `awk` and its cousins like `gawk` are used
for pattern scanning and processing. `awk` is a programming language
typically used in bash scripts.

You can see all the code for this on [Github](https://github.com/funcsec/awk-merge).


## Mail merge template {#mail-merge-template}

A template file was generated. The fields were separated with curly
brackets, `{email}` and `{name}`. At the top of the file the email
header material was added, but was stripped away from the normal email

<a id="code-snippet--template-example"></a>
```cfg
From: me <me@example.com>
To: <{email}>
Subject: Catering for event - {name}

Hello {name},

Hope you’re all having a great day. We’re exploring our
options for catering. We are looking for catering for breakfast and lunch.

What options do you provide and what is your pricing?

Thanks,

me
me@example.com
company
```

This file was saved as `template-example.txt`.


## Contacts file {#contacts-file}

The second part of the mail merge was the contacts file; the list of
people who were to receive the template. The document was created as a
`CSV` file, and had the two fields that were present in the mail merge
template, name and email. The 3rd field was a link to the website if
they only had a contact form and no email address on their website,
good for reducing bot spam but bad for this mail merge.

<a id="code-snippet--contacts-example"></a>
```cfg
name,email,url
Awesome Vendor,vendor@vendoremail.com,https://vendoremail.com
Best Vendor,vendor@bestvendor.com,https://bestvendor.com
```

This file was saved as `example-contacts.csv`

With these 3 pieces, all of the data was in place. What was needed
next was the application configurations and scripting to glue it
together.


## Msmtp configuration {#msmtp-configuration}

`msmtp` was used as the mail transfer agent(MTA), a program that can
talk to a remote SMTP server. It can be found in most linux distro
repositories. To install it under Debian/Ubuntu, the following `apt`
command can be used.

```bash
sudo apt install msmtp
```

The MTA needed to be configured to use my SMTP email provider. The
following configuration was used to allow `msmtp` to authenticate to
the email provider to send email. The file below was used to connect
to gmail. Typically, this file is stored at `./msmtprc`, however for
this example the file was saved at `./msmtprc-example`.

```cfg
account default
host smtp.gmail.com
port 587
protocol smtp
auth on
from me@example.com
user me@example.com
password password
tls on
tls_starttls on
tls_trust_file /etc/ssl/certs/ca-certificates.crt
```

If you're going to try this for yourself it's best to test `msmtp`
beforehand to make sure it is correctly authenticating and able to
send email through your SMTP/email provider.


## Awk script {#awk-script}

`awk` was used for the find and replace action needed to generate the
customized email. It did this by taking the content from a single line
pulled out of the CSV, used it to replace the name and email field data
in the template, then output the new data by containing the field
substitutions which are then sent over to the MTA `msmtp`.

This awk script technically would also work for parsing the entire CSV
at once, but then it would not allow for individually sending the
resulting customized emails unless they were output to a file and then
the file read back into the script with another loop that would send
them. This solution of having one loop seemed better.

The variable `template` in the following script was defined as a command line
variable later in the bash script.

This file was saved as `./awk-merge.awk`.

<a id="code-snippet--awk-header"></a>
```awk
#!/usr/bin/awk -f
BEGIN {
  FS=",";
}
{
      name=$1;
      email=$2;
      while ( (getline ln < template) > 0 )
      {
	      sub(/{name}/,name,ln);
	      sub(/{email}/,email,ln);
	      print ln;
      }
      close(template);
      exit;
}
```

`FS=",";` told `awk` that commas were used as field separators; the
default is to use spaces. The script takes 3 inputs, the name, the
email, and the location. The location of the template is defined as a
variable later in the bash script.


## Bash script {#bash-script}

To glued together this whole thing, a bash script was created to
iterate through the CSV document line by line, outputting a single CSV
line to `awk` which would process and replace the fields. The
output would be piped to `msmtp` to be sent.

The first section of the bash script simply allows for other variables
to be set for the contacts CSV, the template, and the msmtp
configuration. This was added to make it easier to reuse the code in
the future.

It can be reused by indicating other contact, template, and msmtp
configuration files.

```bash
./awk-merge.sh [contact] [template] [msmtp]
```

If I ever use this script again I will likely make these individual
flags rather than variables so that I can set them independently. This
was a quick and dirty solution.

The file created was called `./awk-merge.sh`.

<a id="code-snippet--bash-header"></a>
```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

# awk merge
#   mass mailer using GNU/Linux tools

#set -euo pipefail

[[ -z $3 ]] && MSMTPCONF="./msmtprc-example"      || MSMTPCONF="$3"
[[ -z $2 ]] &&  TEMPLATE="./example-template.txt" || TEMPLATE="$2"
[[ -z $1 ]] &&  CONTACTS="./example-contacts.csv" || CONTACTS="$1"

CONTACTSTMP="$(mktemp)"
ACCOUNT="default"
```

With that the default or custom variables were set.

The example contacts document above had a header indicating what each
of the CSV columns contained. Obviously the email address "email" is
invalid, so the 1st line of the CSV contacts document needed to be
ignored. This was done using the `tail` command to output to a
temporary file that was then used later in the script.

<a id="code-snippet--bash-contacts"></a>
```bash
tail -n +2 "$CONTACTS" > "$CONTACTSTMP"
```

The real meat of the script was a while loop that iterated over the
lines of the new temporary contacts document which lacks the header
row. The script has two branches. If the CSV input does not have
anything for the email field, then it sends the URL field to filefox
and outputs the generated text to STDOUT. If the input does have
something in the email field, then it generates the email and sends
it, skipping opening firefox and outputting the text.

<a id="code-snippet--bash-loop"></a>
```bash
while read -r i; do
  EMAIL="$(echo $i | awk -F, '{ print $2 }')"
  if [ -x $EMAIL ]; then
    echo "$i" | awk -f ./awk-merge.awk -v template="$TEMPLATE"
    firefox "$(echo $i | awk -F, '{ print $3 }')"
    echo "==========================================="
  else
    echo "$i" | awk -f ./awk-merge.awk -v template="$TEMPLATE" \
    | msmtp -a "$ACCOUNT" "$EMAIL"
  fi
  sleep 5
done < "$CONTACTSTMP"
```

The sleep command at the end is not actually necessary.

After the loop was done, the temporary contacts file needed to be removed.

<a id="code-snippet--bash-cleanup"></a>
```bash
rm "$CONTACTSTMP"
```


## Conclusion {#conclusion}

A mail merge script is pretty handy to have. It can save a time and
money when used to replace a mail merge program like Mail Chimp or
Constant Contact. It should be noted that email/SMTP providers
often have rate limits to prevent spammers from decreasing the
reputation of their service. The sleep command at the end of the
loop can be used slow down the sending of email so that it is
under the threshold of the email provider.

You can see all the code for this on [Github](https://github.com/funcsec/awk-merge).

[^fn:1]: Advance your awk skills with two easy tutorials: <https://opensource.com/article/19/10/advanced-awk>
[^fn:2]: Mail merge: <https://pmitev.github.io/to-awk-or-not/Exercises/mail-merge/>